  Of his self-love to stop posterity?

  Calls back the lovely April of her prime,

  Unthrifty loveliness why dost thou spend,

  The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell

    No love toward others in that bosom sits

  For shame deny that thou bear'st love to any

  Grant if thou wilt, thou art beloved of many,

  Shall hate be fairer lodged than gentle love?

    Make thee another self for love of me,

  O that you were your self, but love you are

    O none but unthrifts, dear my love you know,

    And all in war with Time for love of you,

  Thou art more lovely and more temperate:

  O carve not with thy hours my love's fair brow,

    My love shall in my verse ever live young.

    Mine be thy love and thy love's use their treasure.

  O let me true in love but truly write,

  And then believe me, my love is as fair,

  O therefore love be of thyself so wary,

  The perfect ceremony of love's rite,

  And in mine own love's strength seem to decay,

  O'ercharged with burthen of mine own love's might:

  Who plead for love, and look for recompense,

    O learn to read what silent love hath writ,

    To hear with eyes belongs to love's fine wit.

    Then happy I that love and am beloved

  Lord of my love, to whom in vassalage

    Then may I dare to boast how I do love thee,

    For thy sweet love remembered such wealth brings,

  And weep afresh love's long since cancelled woe,

  And there reigns love and all love's loving parts,

  Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye,

  Thou art the grave where buried love doth live,

  Hung with the trophies of my lovers gone,

    Their images I loved, I view in thee,

  These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover:

  Reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme,

  A dearer birth than this his love had brought

    Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love'.

    Yet him for this, my love no whit disdaineth,

    Ah but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds,

  Such civil war is in my love and hate,

  Although our undivided loves are one:

  In our two loves there is but one respect,

  Which though it alter not love's sole effect,

  Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love's delight.

    But do not so, I love thee in such sort,

  I make my love engrafted to this store:

  And our dear love lose name of single one,

  To entertain the time with thoughts of love,

  Take all my loves, my love, yea take them all,

  No love, my love, that thou mayst true love call,

  Then if for my love, thou my love receivest,

  I cannot blame thee, for my love thou usest,

  And yet love knows it is a greater grief

  To bear love's wrong, than hate's known injury.

  And yet it may be said I loved her dearly,

  A loss in love that touches me more nearly.

  Thou dost love her, because thou know'st I love her,

  If I lose thee, my loss is my love's gain,

    Sweet flattery, then she loves but me alone.

  In tender embassy of love to thee,

    And my heart's right, thy inward love of heart.

  Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother;

  With my love's picture then my eye doth feast,

  And in his thoughts of love doth share a part.

  So either by thy picture or my love,

  When as thy love hath cast his utmost sum,

  When love converted from the thing it was

    Since why to love, I can allege no cause.

  His rider loved not speed being made from thee:

  Thus can my love excuse the slow offence,

  Therefore desire (of perfect'st love being made)

  But love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade,

    And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth,

    You live in this, and dwell in lovers' eyes.

  Sweet love renew thy force, be it not said

  So love be thou, although to-day thou fill

  The spirit of love, with a perpetual dulness:

  Return of love, more blest may be the view.

    So true a fool is love, that in your will,

  O no, thy love though much, is not so great,

  It is my love that keeps mine eye awake,

  Mine own true love that doth my rest defeat,

  Sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye,

  Mine own self-love quite contrary I read:

  Against my love shall be as I am now

  My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life.

  That Time will come and take my love away.

    That in black ink my love may still shine bright.

    Save that to die, I leave my love alone.

  For canker vice the sweetest buds doth love,

  The hand that writ it, for I love you so,

  But let your love even with my life decay.

  What merit lived in me that you should love

  After my death (dear love) forget me quite,

  O lest your true love may seem false in this,

  That you for love speak well of me untrue,

    And so should you, to love things nothing worth.

    This thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong,

    To love that well, which thou must leave ere long.

  O know sweet love I always write of you,

  And you and love are still my argument:

    So is my love still telling what is told.

  I grant (sweet love) thy lovely argument

    The worst was this, my love was my decay.

  And do so love, yet when they have devised,

  But that is in my thought, whose love to you

    Such is my love, to thee I so belong,

  Thou canst not (love) disgrace me half so ill,

  Thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell,

    For I must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate.

  Thy love is better than high birth to me,

  And life no longer than thy love will stay,

  For it depends upon that love of thine.

  Happy to have thy love, happy to die!

  Like a deceived husband, so love's face,

  May still seem love to me, though altered new:

  That in thy face sweet love should ever dwell,

  How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame,

  Both grace and faults are loved of more and less:

    But do not so, I love thee in such sort,

  If not from my love's breath? The purple pride

  In my love's veins thou hast too grossly dyed.

  Rise resty Muse, my love's sweet face survey,

    Give my love fame faster than Time wastes life,

  Both truth and beauty on my love depends:

  My love is strengthened though more weak in seeming,

  I love not less, though less the show appear,

  That love is merchandized, whose rich esteeming,

  Our love was new, and then but in the spring,

  Let not my love be called idolatry,

  Nor my beloved as an idol show,

  Kind is my love to-day, to-morrow kind,

  In praise of ladies dead, and lovely knights,

  Can yet the lease of my true love control,

  My love looks fresh, and death to me subscribes,

  That may express my love, or thy dear merit?

  So that eternal love in love's fresh case,

    Finding the first conceit of love there bred,

  That is my home of love, if I have ranged,

  And worse essays proved thee my best of love.

  A god in love, to whom I am confined.

  Your love and pity doth th' impression fill,

  And that your love taught it this alchemy?

    That mine eye loves it and doth first begin.

  Even those that said I could not love you dearer,

  Might I not then say 'Now I love you best,'

    Love is a babe, then might I not say so

  Admit impediments, love is not love

  Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks

  Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks,

    I never writ, nor no man ever loved.

  Forgot upon your dearest love to call,

    The constancy and virtue of your love.

  Thus policy in love t' anticipate

  And ruined love when it is built anew

  Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score,

  If my dear love were but the child of state,

  As subject to time's love or to time's hate,

  O thou my lovely boy who in thy power,

  Thy lovers withering, as thy sweet self grow'st.

  I love to hear her speak, yet well I know,

    And yet by heaven I think my love as rare,

  Thy face hath not the power to make love groan;

  Thine eyes I love, and they as pitying me,

  Thus far for love, my love-suit sweet fulfil.

  'Will', will fulfil the treasure of thy love,

    Make but my name thy love, and love that still,

  Thou blind fool Love, what dost thou to mine eyes,

  When my love swears that she is made of truth,

  O love's best habit is in seeming trust,

  And age in love, loves not to have years told.

  Let me excuse thee, ah my love well knows,

  Though not to love, yet love to tell me so,

  In faith I do not love thee with mine eyes,

  But 'tis my heart that loves what they despise,

  Love is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate,

  And sealed false bonds of love as oft as mine,

  Be it lawful I love thee as thou lov'st those,

  Two loves I have of comfort and despair,

  Those lips that Love's own hand did make,

  My love is as a fever longing still,

  My reason the physician to my love,

  O me! what eyes hath love put in my head,

  If it be not, then love doth well denote,

  Love's eye is not so true as all men's: no,

  How can it? O how can love's eye be true,

    O cunning love, with tears thou keep'st me blind,

  Canst thou O cruel, say I love thee not,

    But love hate on for now I know thy mind,

  Who taught thee how to make me love thee more,

  O though I love what others do abhor,

    If thy unworthiness raised love in me,

    More worthy I to be beloved of thee.

  Love is too young to know what conscience is,

  Yet who knows not conscience is born of love?

  Triumph in love, flesh stays no farther reason,

    Her love, for whose dear love I rise and fall.

  But thou art twice forsworn to me love swearing,

  In vowing new hate after new love bearing:

  Oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy,

  And his love-kindling fire did quickly steep

  Which borrowed from this holy fire of Love,

  But at my mistress' eye Love's brand new-fired,

  The little Love-god lying once asleep,

  Which from Love's fire took heat perpetual,

    Love's fire heats water, water cools not love.

